He goes to bed at night and gets up by day to work.
He started teaching them and said, 
The oldest brother married and died having no children. 
He saw Putu lying in bed and having a fever. 
When the sun had already set or, after the sun had set. 
Then getting up she began serving them food. 
Pray at all times. 
If anyone thinks that he is standing unshakably, 
Be happy because you have hope.
He didn't come to be served, but to serve. 
He became thankful when they served him food.
The doctors said that she was going to die. 
The child spent the day with his grandmother. 
People are going to eat here again tonight. 
Miiyuk babysat her friend's child. 
Putu is staying home with his father.
You asked me, but I have no answer for you. 
He went out again when the day had reached about five o'clock in the afternoon.
Putu is going to come here.
You are trying to show people that you take long as you pray.
The man started to appear from behind the house.
Kasaänaaluk, the president, is going to talk tomorrow.
Putu and Miiyuk met each other in the store.
As he is so active, he broke his arm as others have done.
If you give the dog the dish he will lick it.
The man started to see his relatives when he went to church.
Putu is exhausted having worked very much.
He saw them as they were really working hard rowing.
Go ahead and work for food that lasts into eternal life.
I also followed again when he started to leave.
He began drinking water.
He was sleeping with the music on.
The mother caught the puppy again, I heard.
Man does not live only by food.
He knows that you need these things.
There will also be famine.
Jesus eats together with his disciples.
He remained quiet and didn't say a thing.
How happy you are!
Why are you coming to me?
Don't you have any answer?
How can you speak to your brother?
Come into my house and stay a while.
Get up and come here.
May he work in you what is acceptable to him.
Let that man ask without doubting.
Rejoice when that happens!
Let no one deceive himself.
We are not to allow our old nature to rule us.
Don't associate with them in this.
Don't strive to have food that perishes.
Think about what you were when you were called that you should be believers.
When someone has lit a lamp, he doesn't place it under a pot.
If you want to have life you will obey the commands.
If when you sit down on your glorious throne to be ruler.
If you only want to, you could heal me.
Once again, they called the man who had been born blind.
He saw Putu lying in bed and having a fever.
When the sun had already set or, after the sun had set.
The thief always comes in order to steal.
Pray at all times.
If anyone thinks that he is standing unshakably
He didn't come to be served, but to serve.
Sorrowing in God.
When one helps, one follows the law.
God is with us.
Those people will kill some of them again, as others have done before them.
I have warned you before.
The witnesses told us what they have seen.
First take away the large log from your eye.
Follow me and touch her with your hands, and she will live.
If it is really you, command me to come to you on top of the water.
Can't you remember when I divided five loaves o
Be happy because you have hope.f bread?
When the disciple heard the voice they bowed to the ground.
If you had listened to me before you pushed off Crete.
If you are really the son of God, jump off!
Rachel cried for her [own] children.
Count the number of those who are praying there.
Why are they working today?
He taught by means of parables.
He who has will receive more.
It is I, don't be afraid.
How will we recognize when all of those [things] are beginning to happen?
Through his death, he reconciled both of them with God.
When we all were baptized
If your whole body is light, without any part being dark
Each of you would loosen his donkey from his place on the day of rest.
He will honor you in front of all the ones who were invited.
Some of them have come from afar.
If any person tempts any of these to sin
If your whole body is light, without any part being dark
Right here among you sitting with me the one who is going to give me away.
Only the Father decides the time of its happening.
You are not going to be free except if you pay what you owe to him.
If you love only those who love you.
The disciples came to Jesus privately and asked him
Here is your coffee.
Please place my hot beverage right here.
Please bring your sewing project over here.
That one is my son, who is smart.
From there he went to Sisualik.
Don't travel through that shallow water.
This child is quite active again around here.
The boat is coming in this direction.
I find living here to be warm.
One can hear the sound of the big boat in the distance.
Remember, you said that at the trial at that time.
It has been getting cold for a long time.
The doorkeeper is standing near the entrance.
When we entered we always stood near the door.
He walked up from near the entrance to sing.
Someone coming in is making noise in the entryway.
Take the seal oil out into the storm entry.
Someone is knocking repeatedly on the door out there.
That one across there wants to come to this side.
He worked hard/long to go across the river.
My grandmother lived across the river.
The puppies are running around across there.
He sauntered across to the other side.
He is walking on the trail on the opposite side.
The children must have gone to play across there.
They have come from the school that is across there.
Daughter, did you come from across there by yourself?
I wonder who that visitor is over there.
My dear, please bring my berries from right over there.
He entered right though there.
He is walking to the store over there.
The couple is making its way from over there.
I am going on a short visit over there.
They are singing in the church over there.
Did you just come from over there?
Bring this fish over there.
Do you see the caribou back there?
He came quickly from over there.
Don't climb through back there.
The caribou are coming back there.
The moose may have gone through back there.
Berries are back there in certain spots.
One can enter through the back.
After catching fish, he came from back there.
They brought the dried fish from back there.
The pastor is preaching inside.
When they celebrate Christmas, the tree is way inside.
A man racing with a dog team is coming from upriver.
Visitors are coming from upriver.
People are decorating inside during Christmas.
The old woman is cooking inside, they said.
Perhaps her husband is inside too.
Did you just come from in there?
The little rabbit is eating out there.
Please take my sack to the outside.
They are talking to each other out there.
People are busy again out there.
The birds are visible out there.
It appears that he walked through deep snow out there.
She heard footsteps crunching in the snow outside.
Get firewood from outside.
Look at that insect down there.
Someone took my berry basket down there.
He showed up through down there.
One can see seal hunters down there.
Hunters for bearded seal are traveling toward the ocean.
They are playing down there.
That one down there wants to go upriver already.
They insulate under the house.
I wonder where the fly up there came from.
Perhaps it came in through the stovepipe from up there.
That big fly is buzzing around up there, to my dismay.
The big planes always fly way up high.
I wonder what fell from up there.
The raven on top of the house is cawing.
Jesus is going to come down from heaven some day.
Let us think heavenward.
Put a bandage on his arm.
I learned to sing through these people, my associates.
You are smaller than this one.
That one dog loves to eat.
He gets food from those two.
He barks like those dogs.
That woman is a hard worker.
She is not like others around here.
We usually pick cloudberries from around here.
I wonder what happened to my companion.
It is amazing that people haven't come to visit!
It is amazing that people don't come to visit!
We ate at the place where we picked blueberries.
Let the person near the door sit down.
Go out with the one near the door.
It appears the person knocking outside is unable to come in.
Don't start hanging out with that one there.
I wonder about the name of the man across there.
Could you get some coffee from those two across there?
She wants to have a house like that one across there.
The land across there is beautiful.
It is dangerous in the forest across there.
She is walking along the path across there.
Is my grandmother across there in good health?
I received a letter from my relatives across there.
That one over there is making faces again.
All of a sudden she wants to look like them over there.
I wonder what the man walking over there found.
He left with those who are going for a walk.
My uncle over there is probably hungry.
He went to get fish from those two over there.
The tree back there is tall.
He entered through the door back there.
There are cranberries on the hill back there.
He started making a road back there.
This time there are no berries back there at the place about which they used to talk.
I found blueberries back there.
The one in there singing became joyful.
Those musicians inside are all smiling.
Those still upriver are coming on a log raft.
Serve some food to those upriver who check the nets.
The one cooking in there is making noise with dishes.
Perhaps your spouse inside is ready to call us.
My plant out there certainly grew nicely.
We are thankful for the shade that tree out there provides.
The area outside the house is clean.
Quickly go around the house on the trail out there.
It sounds like the dog has come into the porch.
He is playing among the children out there.
That one down there is loading the boat.
See that you get some money from you dad down there.
The one crossing down there is strutting.
Go and get matches from your older sister down there.
I assume there is a mouse under the house.
They brought the bundle of fish from those people down there.
A tree squirrel is climbing to the tip of the tree up there.
She was struck by the beauty of the tree topper up there.
That little plane up there is faster than expected.
Wow, I wish I could fly like that crane up there.
It sounds like it's getting ready to thunder up there.
The little bird made a nest in that place up there.